						       -*- outline -*-
This corresponds to DUMB 0.12.beta1.

* Not Yet Implemented

Cross compilation (because of endianness, setvbuf(), having to run
ptcomp)

All #ifdefs (see docs/ifnames)

* Installation

Change to the dumb root directory (so that this file is
./docs/autoconf).

Run "./configure".  A Makefile will be generated.

Run "make install".  It'll build everything and install the binaries
in /usr/local/bin unless you told "configure" to use another
directory.

If you want special features, give parameters to "configure".  Use
--help to get a list of options.  If you give --with or --enable
options that "./configure" doesn't understand, it'll silently ignore
them.  Sorry.

* Main options

--help
  The most important option.  Gives you short descriptions for every
  option.

* Graphics options

There used to be a lot more options but I removed them.  If you need
the ability to force/disable a graphics driver on the command line,
please write to tosi@stekt.oulu.fi.

For each graphics system found, a separate DUMB executable will be built:

	aadumb       AA-lib
	dummydumb    dummy video
	ggidumb      GGI
	ldumb        SVGAlib
	xdumb        X11 (including DGA)

Each of these executables is only linked with the (possibly dynamic)
libraries it requires, so you can copy them to machines that don't
have all the libraries your build machine had.

--with-x, --without-x
  Force or disable use of the X Window System.  If X is used, you'll
  also get binaries for the programs XProtoThing and XWad.  To force
  --with-x, you may have to specify the X include and library
  directories with --x-includes=DIR and --x-libraries=DIR, unless
  "configure" can autodetect them.  (In which case you wouldn't need
  to give --with-x either.)

--enable-dummy-video
  Build the dummydumb dummy-video executable in addition to any
  others.  Dummy video means that the program won't open any window or
  such to show you what's going on; it'll just sit and calculate.  It
  also means that you can't control the game.  And it's rather boring
  to play.

  Dummy video might be useful for a dedicated DUMB server that doesn't
  waste CPU time drawing the world.  In the current implementation
  however, DUMB still renders the image as a bitmap even though it
  doesn't draw it on the screen, and that slows things down.

  Dummy video might also be useful if you really don't have any real
  video library and still want to see that DUMB compiles and runs.
  But in that case, you'd better get AA-lib.

  In DUMB 0.11, dummy video was automatically enabled if no video
  libraries were found.  Not any more.

* Sound options

The sound drivers differ from the video drivers in that you can only
have one of them enabled.  If you force one of them to be used, all
others will be disabled.  As soon as "configure" finds a driver that
it can use, it'll stop looking.

--without-sound
  Disable sound.  Overrides the options below.

--with-oss, --without-oss
  Use the Open Sound System that was created by Hannu Savolainen for
  Linux and has been ported to BSD at least.  There are free and
  commercial versions of OSS; DUMB doesn't care which you have.

--with-mme, --without-mme
  Use the MME library included in Digital Unix.  The interface seems
  to stem from Microsoft Windows, so perhaps this driver could be used
  in a Windows version of DUMB too.

Both sound drivers support these options:

--disable-16bit-sound
  Force 8-bit sound.

--disable-stereo-sound
  Force mono sound.

* DOOM and Heretic options

DUMB supports playing DOOM and Heretic levels if you tell "configure"
where the WADs are.

The GNU Coding Standards say that --with options shouldn't be used for
file names but I couldn't find any other way of implementing this.

--with-doom-wad=FILE
  Use doom*.wad from FILE.  It is an error if the file doesn't exist
  or is unreadable or a directory.

  If this option isn't given, "configure" will look for doom.wad and
  doom1.wad in some obvious places.  See configure.in for the list.

--without-doom-wad
  Don't look for doom.wad.  

--with-heretic-wad=FILE
--without-heretic-wad
  As above but for heretic.wad.

* Framebuffer options

DUMB supports framebuffers that have 1, 2 or 4 bytes (8, 16 or 32
bits) per pixel.  The renderer is compiled for each BPP value
separately, the versions are all linked together, and DUMB will choose
the right one when run.  If you don't need support for some BPP value,
you can leave it out to speed up compilation:

--disable-1bpp
  Disable support of framebuffers with 1 byte (8 bits) per pixel.

--disable-2bpp
  Disable support of framebuffers with 2 bytes (16 bits) per pixel.

--disable-4bpp
  Disable support of framebuffers with 4 bytes (32 bits) per pixel.

If you disable all BPPs, "configure" will warn you but continue.  The
game can't then be played.  But tools like ptcomp will work.

* Networking

This is like sound; you can only choose one of these options.
Currently, only Unix networking (Berkeley sockets) is supported.

--without-net
  Disable networking.  Actually, this uses a dummy network driver, but
  you don't have to care of that.

--with-unix-net, --without-unix-net
  Force or disable master-slave Unix networking.  This uses UDP
  datagrams and system calls gethostbyname(), htons(), socket(),
  bind(), fcntl(), close(), recvfrom(), select() and sendto().

